Add blog post about block patterns (#209)
infinum/eightshift-docs: website/blog/2022-12-22-block-patterns.md

---
title: Block Patterns
description: Intro to block patterns and examples how to use them
slug: block-patterns
authors: obradovic
date: 2022-12-22
tags: [eightshift, boilerplate, block, patterns]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Although Block Patterns may be similar to Block Variations, there are some differences between the two. This blog post will cover what Block Patterns are and how to use them.
<!--truncate-->

## What are Block Patterns and why use them?

> Block Patterns are predefined block layouts that allow you to speed up adding new content and make it look more consistent. The basic idea is to have a blank template that consists of multiple blocks, that already have predefined options, and all you have to do is add content to these blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Block Patterns are predefined block layouts which allow you to speed up adding new content and make it look more consistent. The basic idea is to have a ready template which consists of multiple blocks, that already have predefined options, and all you have to do is add content to these blocks.
```

> Block Patterns are predefined block layouts which allow you to speed up adding new content and make it look more consistent. The basic idea is to have a ready template which consists of multiple blocks, that already have predefined options, and all you have to do is add content to these blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Block Patterns are predefined block layouts which allow you to add content faster and make it look more consistent. The basic idea is to have a ready-made template which consists of multiple blocks, that have options predefined, and all you have to do is add content to these blocks.
```

> They can be used in multiple ways. You can create sections composed of a few blocks which you can then easily insert anywhere on the site. Also, you have the option to create complex page layouts which could be used for writing blog posts, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can be used in multiple ways. You can create sections composed of few blocks which you can then easily insert anywhere on the site. You can also create complex page layouts which could be used for writing blog posts, for example.
```

## Technical differences
As explained in the [Eightshift Development kit documentation](https://eightshift.com/docs/basics/blocks-patterns), the main difference between variations and patterns are:
- variations provide data using `manifest.json`, while patterns are registered using PHP
- variations appear in the editor in the same tab as blocks, while patterns appear in their own tab

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe also add that variations are presets of just one block, and patterns are just a "named collection of blocks"?

Author: I can add it, although I did mention in the section above that patterns are collection of blocks. So I'm not sure if that would be repeating it too soon 😄

```shell
wp boilerplate create service-example --folder=BlockPatterns --file_name=ManagePatternCategories
```

Now that we have our service class, we'll add methods for removing core patterns and pattern categories. First, the method for removing core categories.
```php
/**
 * Unregisters core block pattern categories
 *
 * @return void
 */
public function removeCoreCategories()
{
	\unregister_block_pattern_category('buttons');
	\unregister_block_pattern_category('columns');
	\unregister_block_pattern_category('gallery');
	\unregister_block_pattern_category('header');
	\unregister_block_pattern_category('text');
}
```
The second method will remove all core patterns

```php
/**
 * Removes support for core block patterns
 *
 * @return void
 */
public function removeBlockPatternsCore()
{
	\remove_theme_support('core-block-patterns');
}
```

For these methods to work, we need to add them to the `register()` method of our service class. Add the following actions:
```php
\add_action('init', [$this, 'removeCoreCategories'], 40);
\add_action('after_setup_theme', [$this, 'removeBlockPatternsCore'], 20);
```

> If you try searching for patterns in your editor, you'll notice they are no longer available. Now we can move on to adding our block pattern categories. The best approach is to define the pattern category names as constants inside your class. We will add two categories, **Templates** and **Sections**. We can add the following code inside our class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you try searching for patterns in your editor, you'll notice they are no longer available. Now we can move on to adding our block pattern categories. The best approach is to define the pattern category names as constants inside your class. In this example, we will add two categories: **Templates** and **Sections**. We can add the following code inside our class:
```

```php
class ManagePatternCategories implements ServiceInterface
{
	public const TEMPLATES_CATEGORY = 'templates-category';
	public const SECTIONS_CATEGORY = 'sections-category';

	// Removed parts of code for better readability.

	/**
	 * Removes support for core block patterns
	 *
	 * @return void
	 */
	public function addCategories()
	{
		\register_block_pattern_category(self::TEMPLATES_CATEGORY, [
			'label' =>  \esc_html__('Templates', 'es-blog'),
		]);

		\register_block_pattern_category(self::SECTIONS_CATEGORY, [
			'label' => \esc_html__('Sections', 'es-blog'),
		]);
	}
}
```

Finally, return to your Intro Pattern class and update the `getCategories()` method:
```php
protected function getCategories(): array
{
	return [
		ManagePatternCategories::SECTIONS_CATEGORY
	];
}
```

In editor, in the Pattern tab, you should now see your new pattern category and the Intro Pattern.

![New pattern category and block pattern](/img/blog/block-pattern-example.png)

## Things to keep in mind

> Since Block Patterns just add content which you can then modify at will, it becomes an issue if you've already used this pattern on multiple places and then notice you missed something. Fixing the pattern in code will apply the changes on all new patterns you add, but you will have to fix this manually in the editor everywhere where you've already used that pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Block patterns add layout and content which you can then modify at will per instance. These instances are not synchronised with the code-base so it becomes an issue if you've already used a pattern on multiple places on the site and then notice you've missed something in the pattern configuration phase. Fixing the pattern in the code-base will apply the changes on all newly added instances, but you will have to fix the misconfigured instances manually.
```

My attempt at rewording this part to be more specific :)

Author: An excellent attempt I must say 😄 💪

> Block patterns add layout and content which you can then modify at will per instance. These instances are not synchronised with the code-base so it becomes an issue if you've already used a pattern on multiple places on the site and then notice you've missed something in the pattern configuration phase. Fixing the pattern in the code-base will apply the changes on all newly added instances, but you will have to fix the misconfigured instances manually.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Block patterns add layout and content which you can then modify at will per instance. These instances are not synchronised with the codebase so it becomes an issue if you've already used a pattern on multiple places on the site and then notice you've missed something in the pattern configuration phase. Fixing the pattern in the codebase will apply the changes on all newly added instances, but you will have to fix the misconfigured instances manually.
```
(if you prefers `code base`, that's also legit, but no dash 😄)
